# dissertation
Project completed as part of my Masters Dissertation

This project explores an innovative approach to cluster locations for optimised delivery routes. Demand for the final stage of deliveries, known as last-mile logistics, has increased over the last five years due to increases in e-commerce. The increase in deliveries required an increase in vehicle fleets to handle the volume, ultimately increasing the proportion of delivery vehicles in traffic. More vans performing deliveries produce a larger environmental and financial impact on deliveries, further impacting city congestion. Cargo bikes offer an alternative solution for deliveries with a lower footprint and significant reduction in cost and emissions. By developing a routing process designed for cargo bikes, this project aims to identify the benefits that clustering will offer to route optimisation, achieved through simplifying the route to be optimised. The clustering performance is further analysed to identify the characteristics of delivery routes that would benefit the most and define the criteria for effective clustering.  Three algorithms — mean shift, agglomerative, and density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise — are compared to determine the most appropriate algorithm for the clustering application. The results of clustered routes are compared to standard optimised routes and evaluated with a series of metrics to measure the performance and benefits offered. Beyond the testing of the clustering process, the impact of routing specifically for cargo bikes is analysed. The results from the tests indicate that with an appropriate route, clustering offered a benefit by reducing the overall locations to optimise and route. Effective clusters with a few locations and densely packed are key to obtaining the benefits from clustering, and the Agglomerative algorithm provided the most consistent performance. Additionally, explicitly designing an algorithm for cargo bikes increases the efficiency of routes through move-effective and diverse routing options, therefore, a worthwhile adaptation to the optimisation process.
